---
title: 3. Bellman Optimality Equation - BOE
timestamp: 2026-03-11 04:03:15+08:00
series: Mathematical Foundation of Reinforcement Learning
tags: [Study notes,RL]
description: Study notes of "Mathematical Foundation of Reinforcement Learning".
draft: false
---

## Definition of optimal policy
The state value could be used to evaluate if a policy is good or not: if $$v_{\pi_{1}}(s)\ge v_{\pi_{2}}(s),\,\forall s \in \mathcal{S}$$
then $\pi_{1}$ is "better" than $\pi_{2}$.
> **Definition** 
> A policy $\pi^{*}$ is optimal if $v_{\pi^{*}}\ge v_{\pi}(s)$ for all $s$ and for any other policy $\pi$.

1. Does the optimal policy exist?
2. Is the optimal policy unique?
3. Is the optimal policy stochastic or deterministic?
4. How to obtain the optimal policy?

To answer these questions, we use *bellman optimality equation (BOE)* .

## BOE
Bellman optimality equation (*elementwise form*): $$v(s) = \max_{\pi}\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)\left( \sum_{r}^{}p(r|s,a)r + \gamma \sum_{s'}^{}p(s'|s,a)v(s') \right), \forall s \in \mathcal{S}$$
$$\Rightarrow \max_{\pi}\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)q(s,a),\forall s \in \mathcal{S}$$

Bellman optimality equation (*matrix-vector form*): $$v = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$$
where the elements corresponding to $s$ or $s'$ are $$\begin{align}
[r_{\pi}]_{s}\triangleq & \sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)\sum_{r}^{}p(r|s,a)r, \\ 
[P_{\pi}]_{s,s'} = p(s'|s) \triangleq & \sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)\sum_{s'}^{}p(s'|s,a)
\end{align}$$
Here $\max_{\pi}$ is performed elementwise.

### Maximization on the right-hand side
> Example (How to solve two unknown from one equation)
> Consider two variable $x,a\in \mathbb{R}$. Suppose they stisfy $$x = \max_{a}(2x - 1 - a^{2}).$$
> This equation has 2 unknowns. To solve them, 
> 1. consider the right hand side. Regardless the value of $x$, $\max_{a}(2x - 1 - a^{2}) = 2x - 1$ where the maximization is achieved when $a = 0$. 
> 2. when $a = 0$, the equation becomes $x = 2x - 1$ are the solution of the equation.
> 
> Essentially, it involves using *partial derivatives* and the *gradient* to optimize a function of two variables.

> Example (How to solve $\max_{\pi}\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)q(s,a)$)
> Suppose $q_{1}, q_{2}, q_{3} \in \mathbb{R}$ are given. Find $c_{1}^{*},c_{2}^{*},c_{3}^{*}$ solving $$max_{c_{1},c_{2},c_{3}}(c_{1}q_{1}+c_{2}q_{2}+c_{3}q_{3}).$$
> where $c_{1}+c_{2}+c_{3}=1$ and $c_{1},c_{2},c_{3}\ge{0}.$
> Without loss of generality, suppose $q_{3}\ge q_{1},q_{2}$. Then, the optimal solution is $c_{3}^{*} = 1$ and $c_{1}^{*}=c_{2}^{*}=0$. That is because for any $c_{1},c_{2},c_{3}$ $$q_{3} = (c_{1} + c_{2} + c_{3})q_{3} = c_{1}q_{3} + c_{2}q_{3} + c_{3}q_{3} \ge c_{1}q_{1} + c_{2}q_{2} + c_{3}q_{3}.$$

Inspired by the above example, considering that $\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s) = 1$, we have $$\max_{\pi}\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)q(s,a)=\max_{a\in \mathcal{A}(s)}q(s,a),$$
where the optimality is achieved when $$\pi_{a|s}=\left\{ \begin{matrix}
1 & a=a^{*} \\
0 & a\neq a^{*}
\end{matrix} \right. $$
where $a^{*} = \arg\max_{a}q(s,a)$.

The BOE is $v = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$. Let $$f(v) := \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$$
Then, the Bellman optimality equation becomes $$v = f(v)$$
where $$[f(v)]_{s} = \max_{\pi}\sum_{a}^{}\pi(a|s)q(s,a),s\in \mathcal{S}$$

### Contraction mapping theorem
*Fixed point*: $x\in X$ is a fixed point of $f:X\to X$ if $$f(x) = x$$
*Contraction mapping (or contractive function)* : $f$ is a contraction mapping if $$\lVert f(x_{1}) - f(x_{2}) \rVert \le \gamma \lVert x_{1} - x_{2} \rVert$$
where $\gamma\in(0,1)$.
1. $\gamma$ must be strictly less than $1$ so that many limits sush as $\gamma^{k}\to 0$ as $k\to 0$ hold.
2. Here $\lVert \cdot \rVert$ can be **any vector norm**.

> Example
> $x  = f(x) = \frac{1}{2}x, x\in \mathbb{R}$.
> It is easy to verify that $x = 0$ is a fixed point since $0 = \frac{1}{2}0$.
> Moreover, $f(x) = \frac{1}{2}x$ is a contraction mapping because $\left\lVert  \frac{1}{2}x_{1}-\frac{1}{2}x_{2}  \right\rVert = \frac{1}{2}\lVert x_{1} - x_{2} \rVert \le \gamma \lVert x_{1} - x_{2} \rVert$ for any $\gamma\in\left[ \frac{1}{2}, 1 \right)$.

Theorem *Contraction Mapping Theorem*
> For **any equation** that has the form of $x = f(x)$, if $f$ is a *contraction mapping*, then
> 1. *Existence* : there exists a fixed point $x^{*}$ satisfying $f(x^{*}) = x^{*}$.
> 2. *Uniqueness* : The fixed point $x^{*}$ is unique.
> 3. *Algorithm* : Consider a sequence $\{x_{k}\}$ where $x_{k+1} = f(x_{k})$, then $x_{k}\to x^{*}$ as $k\to \infty$. Moreover, the **convergence rate is exponentially fase**.

> **Proof of the contraction mapping theorem**
> ...

### Solution of BOE
Let's come back to the Bellman optimality equation: $$v = f(v) = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$$
$f(v)$ is a contraction mapping satisfying $$\lVert f(v_{1}) - f(v_{2}) \rVert \le \gamma \lVert v_{1} - v_{2} \rVert$$
where $\gamma$ is the discount rate.
Applying the contraction mapping theorem gives the following results.
For the BOE $v = f(v) = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$, there always *exists* a solution $v^{*}$ and the solution is *unique*. The solution could be solved iteratively by $$v_{k+1} = f(v_{k}) = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v_{k})$$
This sequence $\{v_{k}\}$ converges to $v^{*}$ *exponentially fast* given any initial guess $v_{0}$. The convergence rate is determined by $\gamma$.

### Optimality
Suppose $v^{*}$ is the solution to the Bellman optimality equation. It satisfies $$v^{*} = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v^{*})$$
Suppose $$\pi^{*} = \arg\max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v^{*})$$
Then $$v^{*} = r_{\pi^{*}} + \gamma P_{\pi^{*}}v^{*}$$
Therefore, $\pi^{*}$ is a policy and $v^{*} = v_{\pi^{*}}$ is the corresponding state value.

---
Suppose that $v^{*}$ is the unique solution to $v = \max_{\pi}(r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v)$, and $v_{\pi}$ is the state value function satisfying $v_{\pi} = r_{\pi} + \gamma P_{\pi}v_{\pi}$ for any given policy $\pi$, then $$v^{*}\ge v_{\pi},\forall \pi$$

---
For any $s\in \mathcal{S}$, the *deterministic greedy* policy $$\pi^{*}(a|s)=\left\{ \begin{matrix}
1 & a=a^{*}(s) \\
0 & a\neq a^{*}(s)a
\end{matrix} \right. $$
is an optimal policy solving the BOE. Here, $$a^{*}(s) = \arg\max_{a}q^{*}(a,s),$$
where $$q^{*}(s,a):=\sum_{r}^{}p(r|s,a)r+\gamma \sum_{s'}^{}p(s'|s,a)v^{*}(s')$$ 

### Analyzing optimal polices
> **Theorem (Optimal Policy Invariance)**
> Consider a Markov decision process with $v^{*}\in \mathbb{R}^{\lvert \mathcal{S} \rvert}$ as the optimal state valur satisfying $v^{*} = \max_{\pi}(r_\pi + \gamma P_{\pi}v^{*})$. If every reward $r$ is changed by an affine transformation to $ar + b$, where $a,b\in \mathbb{R}$ and $a\neq 0$, then corresponding optimal state value $v'$ is also an affine transformation of $v^{*}$: $$v' = av^{*} + \frac{b}{1-\gamma}\boldsymbol{1},$$
> where $\gamma\in(0,1)$ is the discount rate and $\boldsymbol{1} = [1,\dots,1]^{T}$.
> Consequently, the optimal polices are invariant to the affine transformation of the reward signals.