---
title: '[Mathematical Foundation of Reinforcement Learning] 1. Basic Concepts'
timestamp: 2026-03-10 15:47:02+08:00
series: Notes of "Mathematical Foundation of Reinforcement Learning"
tags: [Study notes,RL]
description: Study notes of "Mathematical Foundation of Reinforcement Learning".
draft: false
---

These are my study notes from learning **Professor Shiyu Zhao**’s *Mathematical Foundations of Reinforcement Learning*. Since most of the original course materials are in English, I am also writing this series of notes in English.

If you would like to learn more about the original course, please refer to **Professor Shiyu Zhao**’s [repository](https://github.com/MathFoundationRL/Book-Mathematical-Foundation-of-Reinforcement-Learning).

---

1. `States`: The status of the agent with respect to the environment.
2. `State space`: The set of all states $S = \{s_{i}\}$
3. `Action`: For each state, there are som possible actions: $a_{1},\dots,a_{n}$
4. `Action space of a state`: The set of all possible actions of a state: $A(s_{i}) = \{a_{i}\}$
   **Different states can have different action spaces.**
5. `State Transition`: When taking an action, the agent may move from one state to another. $s_{r}\xrightarrow{a_{s}} s_{t}$
   We can use `tabular representation` for *deterministic* cases.
6. `State transition probability`: use probability to describe state transition.
7. A `policy` tells the agent which actions to take at every state. Mathematically, policies can be described by `conditional probabilities`. $\pi(a_{i}|s_{j}) = P$
8. `Reward`: A real number we get after taking an action. A *positive* reward represents *encouragement* to take such actions. A *negative* reward represents punishment to take such actions. Also, conditional probability: $p(r = m|s_{i}, a_{j}) = P$
9. A `trajectory` is a state-action-reward chain: $$s_{1}\xrightarrow[r=0]{a_{2}}s_{2}\xrightarrow[r=0]{a_{3}}s_{5}\xrightarrow[r=0]{a_{3}}s_{8}\xrightarrow[r=1]{a_{2}}s_{9}$$A trajectory may be *infinite*.
10. `Return`: The sum of all rewards collected along the trajectory: $\text{return} = \sum_{}^{}r$
11. `Discounted rate`: $\gamma \in [0, 1)$
12. `Discounted return`: $\text{return} = \sum_{i=1}^{\infty}r_{i}\gamma^{i - 1}$
13. When interaction with the environment following a policy, the agent may stop at some `terminal states`. The resulting trajectory is called an `episode`(or a `trial`).
14. Some tasks may have no terminal states, meaning the interaction with the evironment will never end. Such tasks are called `continuing tasks`(or just task that take a long time). In fact, we can treat episodic and continuing tasks in a unified mathematical way by converting episodic tasks to continuing tasks:
	1. Treat the target state as a special `absorbing state`. Once the agent reaches an absorbing state, it will never leave. The consequent rewards $r = 0$.
	2. Treat the target state as a normal state with a policy. The agent can still leave the target state and gain `r = +1` when entering the target state.
15. `Markov decision process (MDP)`
16. `Markov property`: memoryless property: 
    $$
    p(s_{t+1}|a_{t+1},s_{t},\dots,a_{1},s_{0}) = p(s_{t+1}|a_{t+1},s_{t})
    $$
    
    $$
    p(r_{t+1}|a_{t+1},s_{t},\dots,a_{1},s_{0}) = p(s_{t+1}|a_{t+1},s_{t})
    $$